Updated mono testing doc (#44360)
dotnet/runtime: docs/workflow/testing/mono/testing.md

# Running test suites using Mono

Before running tests, [build Mono](../../building/mono/README.md) using the desired configuration.

## Runtime Tests
### Testing on desktop Mono:

> To build the runtime tests for Mono JIT or interpreter, execut the following command from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the runtime tests for Mono JIT or interpreter, execute the following command from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests`
```

--------------------------------------------------
```
To run all tests, execute that command, adding `Android` at the end.

### Additional Documents
For more details about internals of the runtime tests, please refer to the [CoreCLR testing documents](../coreclr)

## Libraries tests
### Testing on desktop Mono
Build and run library tests against Mono JIT or interpreter
```
$(REPO_ROOT)/dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:RuntimeFlavor=mono /p:Configuration=<Release/Debug> $(REPO_ROOT)/src/libraries/<library>/tests
```
Alternatively, you could execute the following command from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/mono/netcore`
```
make run-tests-corefx-<library>
```
For example, the following command is for running System.Runtime tests:
```
make run-tests-corefx-System.Runtime
```
### Testing on mobile targets and WebAssembly
Build and run library tests against Webassembly, Android or iOS. See instructions located in [Library testing document folder](../libraries/)

# Running the Mono samples

> There are a few convenient samples located in `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/mono/netcore/sample`, which could help you test your program easily with different flavors of Mono or do a sanity check on the build. The samples are configured with a certain mode. Please refer to the Makefile for configuration details. If you would like to work with other mode, you could edit the Makefile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few convenient samples located in `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/mono/netcore/sample`, which could help you test your program easily with different flavors of Mono or do a sanity check on the build. The samples are set up to work with a specific configuration; please refer to the relevant Makefile for specifics. If you would like to work with a different configuration, you can edit the Makefile.
```

> * To run the desktop Mono sample, cd to `HelloWorld` and execute:

Reviewer: The bullet points are back :(
Please use sub-headers.

Author: They are very short. I thought bullet points were more suitable.

# Running test suites using Mono

Before running tests, [build Mono](../../building/mono/README.md) using the desired configuration.

## Runtime Tests

> ### Testing against Mono JIT:

Reviewer: I really don't think you should specify the JIT here (I believe I took it out in my previous suggested edit) but instead Desktop, which also matching the other platforms mentioned below. You can test against any build configuration with this method; it would work perfectly fine for the interpreter, for example.

Author: It definitely won't work for AOT, which is supported. I know that the steps are different. But don't know the exact commands. LLVM is not supported yet, so can't predict that. Basically, it only works for JIT and interpreter. I will put interpreter there as well.

> * Build runtime tests by executing the follwiing command from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build the runtime tests by executing the following command from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests`
```

```
./build.sh excludemonofailures <release|debug>
```

> * Running a single test:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running a single test:
```

```

> cd ../mono/netcore

Reviewer: Again, I don't think you want to put this cd twice. Just say "from `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests`" or something.

Author: The document was written from a developer point of view. Personally, I prefer to type less when possible. That's why I put the command there directly for people to copy and paste. I don't think this matters much. However, I could see from your perspective, it is a duplication.

--------------------------------------------------
```

Run that command, adding `wasm` to the end.

### Testing on Android x64:
```
$(REPO_ROOT)/src/tests/build.sh -skipstressdependencies -excludemonofailures os Android x64 <Release/Debug>
```

The last few lines of the build log should contain something like this:
```
--------------------------------------------------
 Example run.sh command

 src/tests/run.sh --coreOverlayDir=<repo_root>artifacts/tests/coreclr/Android.x64.Release/Tests/Core_Root --testNativeBinDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/obj/coreclr/Android.x64.Release/tests --testRootDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/tests/coreclr/Android.x64.Release --copyNativeTestBin Release
--------------------------------------------------
```
Run that command, adding `Android` at the end.

For more details about internals of the runtime tests, please refer to the [CoreCLR testing documents](../coreclr)

## Libraries tests

> * Build and run library tests against Mono JIT:

Reviewer: Again, JIT -> Desktop and remove the bullet points and for this line, replace with h3 (i.e. ###).

Author: Same explanation as above.

    * cd into the test library of your choice (`cd $(REPO_ROOT)/src/libraries/<library>/tests`)
    * Run the tests

```

> $(REPO_ROOT)/dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:RuntimeFlavor=mono /p:Configuration=<Release/Debug>

Reviewer: Is the `/p:RuntimeFlavor` still needed? I would also consider mentioning the netcore directory's makefile target here in addition to the msbuild workflow.

Author: Afaik, it is needed. Will add the makefile target here.

```

* Build and run library tests against Webassembly, Android or iOS. See instructions located in [Library testing document folder](../libraries/)

> # Running the Mono samples

Reviewer: My comments on indirect language in the first section apply to the rest, but I still think as a whole there's far too much copy-paste in this section. 

I would structure this by first outlining the common components (going to the directory, executing make run, and that if you want to change the configuration you need to edit the Makefile) and then using subheaders for the specifics of each platform (what the directory is called, what the default runtime configuration is, and in the case of wasm that you need to run `make build` first).

There are a few convenient samples located in `$(REPO_ROOT)/src/mono/netcore/sample`, which could help you test your program easily with different flavors of Mono or do a sanity check on the build.

## Sample for desktop Mono

> It lives in `HelloWorld` folder. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The desktop sample lives in `HelloWorld` folder.
```
Avoid referencing the previous header with an unclear pronoun. It's fine to restate this.
This document might have other trailing spaces as well, so I'd check for that locally.

> To run that program, you could simply cd to that directory and execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the sample, cd to the directory and execute:
```
Indirect language. Also, avoid "simply" unless necessary in documentation, for the same reasons as words like "obviously": it rarely adds clarity and can potentially be insulting to newer contributors.

> # Running Tests using Mono Runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Running test suites using Mono
```

> Before running any tests, build mono in the way that you would like to test with.
> See the instructions for [Building Mono](../../building/mono/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before running tests, [build Mono](../../building/mono/README.md) using the desired configuration.
```

> ## Running Runtime Tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Runtime Tests
```

> * Build and run runtime tests against Mono JIT:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Desktop:
```

Author: There will be instructions for other flavors of desktop Mono, for example, AOT, which will be slightly different. I would prefer to be more specific here.

>     * Build and run one specific runtime test. From the root directory run the following command:

Reviewer: Rather than specifying "from the root directory" each time and then including the cd in both commands, I'd just say "You should run these commands from src/mono/netcore" earlier and then not mention it otherwise. You also don't need the bullet point here, so you can just say "Running a single test:" followed by the code snippet.

Author: Fixed

```
cd src/mono/netcore

> make run-tests-coreclr CoreClrTest="bash ../../artifacts/tests/coreclr/OSX.x64.Release/JIT/opt/InstructionCombining/DivToMul/DivToMul.sh"

Reviewer: Does this actually build the test now? It used to be that you needed to build them beforehand. If that's changed, the Makefile should be updated as well since it explicitly says that's required, but given the path you pass here is to artifacts I assume you still need to build them in advance. See https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/44205

Author: Good catch, will fix it.

```

>     * Build and run all runtime tests. From the root directory run the following command:

Reviewer: Similar feedback here to the comment for the individual tests. No bullet point, no root directory, etc.

Author: Fixed

```
cd src/mono/netcore
make run-tests-coreclr-all
```

> * Build and run runtime tests for Webassembly. From the root directory run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing on WebAssembly:
```

```
src/tests/build.sh -skipstressdependencies -excludemonofailures os Browser wasm <Release/Debug>
```

>     * From the last few lines of the build log, you will see something like this

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The last few lines of the build log should contain something like this:
```

```
--------------------------------------------------
 Example run.sh command

 src/tests/run.sh --coreOverlayDir=<repo_root>artifacts/tests/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release/Tests/Core_Root --testNativeBinDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/obj/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release/tests --testRootDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/tests/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release --copyNativeTestBin Release
--------------------------------------------------
```

>     * To run the tests, copy that command and add `wasm` at the end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Run that command, adding `wasm` to the end.
```

> * Build and run Runtime Tests for Android x64. From the root directory run the following command:

Reviewer: See previous sections for formatting suggestions. Same idea here.

Author: Fixed.

```
src/tests/build.sh -skipstressdependencies -excludemonofailures os Android x64 <Release/Debug>
```

>     * From the last few lines of the build log, you will see something like this

Reviewer: Same as previous sections, including that you need a newline before this or it will mess up the formatting.

Author: Fixed.

```
--------------------------------------------------
 Example run.sh command

 src/tests/run.sh --coreOverlayDir=<repo_root>artifacts/tests/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release/Tests/Core_Root --testNativeBinDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/obj/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release/tests --testRootDir=<repo_root>/artifacts/tests/coreclr/Browser.wasm.Release --copyNativeTestBin Release
--------------------------------------------------
```
    * To run the tests, copy that command and add `Android` at the end.

> * For more details about the nature of the runtime tests, please refer to [Coreclr testing documents](../coreclr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about internals of the runtime tests, please refer to the [CoreCLR testing documents](../coreclr)
```

> ## Running Library Tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Libraries tests
```

* Build and run library tests against Mono JIT:

1. cd into the test library of your choice (`cd src/libraries/<library>/tests`)

2. Run the tests

```
dotnet build /t:Test /p:RuntimeFlavor=mono /p:Configuration=<Release/Debug>
```

> * Build and run library tests against Webassembly. See instructions for [Testing Webassembly](../libraries/testing-wasm.md)

Reviewer: I don't think you have to specify every platform here this way. You can either say "refer to the instructions in [folder]" or just have a line like "Instructions for [wasm](link), [android](link)," etc.

Author: Fixed

* Build and run library tests against Android. See instructions for [Testing Android](../libraries/testing-android.md)

* Build and run library tests against iOS. See instructions for [Testing iOS](../libraries/testing-apple.md)

> # Test with sample program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Running the Mono samples
```

> There is a HelloWorld sample program lives at

Reviewer: I would mention that there are a variety of samples. Is there anything special to do for the other ones, or is `make run` sufficient in every case?

Author: It is upto how the Makefile was created. There are ones needs `make build && make run`. I will add instructions to them here.
